# Chapter 4. How Observability Relates to DevOps, SRE, and Cloud Native

So far, we’ve referenced observability in the context of modern software systems. Therefore, it’s important to unpack how observability fits into the landscape of other modern practices such as the DevOps, site reliability engineering (SRE), and cloud native movements. This chapter examines how these movements have both magnified the need for observability and integrated it into their practices.

Observability does not exist in a vacuum; instead, it is both a consequence and an integral part of the DevOps, SRE, and cloud native movements. Like testability, observability is a property of these systems that improves understanding of them. Observability and testability require continuous investment rather than being a one-time addition, or having a one-size-fits-all solution. As they improve, benefits accrue for you, as a developer, and for end users of your systems. By examining why these movements created a need for observability and integrated its use, you can better understand why observability has become a mainstream topic and why increasingly diverse teams are adopting this practice.

# Cloud Native, DevOps, and SRE in a Nutshell

In contrast with the monolithic and waterfall development approaches that software delivery teams employed in the 1990s to early 2000s, modern software development and operations teams increasingly use cloud native and Agile methodologies. In particular, these methodologies enable teams to autonomously release features without tightly coupling their impact to other teams. Loose coupling unlocks several key business benefits, including higher productivity and better profitability. For example, the ability to resize individual service components upon demand and pool resources across a large number of virtual and physical servers means the business benefits from better cost controls and scalability.

###### Note

For more examples of the benefits of Agile and cloud native methodologies, see the DevOps Research and Assessment (DORA) 2019 [Accelerate State of DevOps Report](https://oreil.ly/2Gqjz) by Nicole Forsgren et al.

However, cloud native has significant trade-offs in complexity. An often overlooked aspect of introducing these capabilities is the management cost. Abstracted systems with dynamic controls introduce new challenges of emergent complexity and nonhierarchical communications patterns. Older monolithic systems had less emergent complexity, and thus simpler monitoring approaches sufficed; you could easily reason about what was happening inside those systems and where unseen problems might be occurring. Today, running cloud native systems feasibly at scale demands more advanced sociotechnical practices like continuous delivery and observability.

The Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF) defines [cloud native](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/main/DEFINITION.md) as “building and running scalable applications in modern, dynamic environments...[Cloud native] techniques enable loosely coupled systems that are *resilient*, *manageable*, and *observable*. Combined with robust automation, they allow engineers to *make high-impact changes frequently and predictably with minimal toil*.” By minimizing toil (repetitive manual human work) and emphasizing observability, cloud native systems empower developers to be creative. This definition focuses not just on scalability, but also on development velocity and operability as goals.

###### Note

For a further look at what it means to eliminate toil, we recommend [Chapter 5 of Site Reliability Engineering](https://sre.google/sre-book/eliminating-toil), edited by Betsy Beyer et al. (O’Reilly).

The shift to cloud native doesn’t only require adopting a complete set of new technologies, but also changing how people work. That shift is inherently sociotechnical. On the surface, using the microservices toolchain itself has no explicit requirement to adopt new social practices. But to achieve the promised benefits of the technology, changing the work habits also becomes necessary. Although this should be evident from the stated definition and goals, teams typically get several steps in before realizing that their old work habits do not help them address the management costs introduced by this new technology. That is why successful adoption of cloud native design patterns is inexorably tied to the need for observable systems and for DevOps and SRE practices.

Similarly, DevOps and SRE both highlight a desire to shorten feedback loops and reduce operational toil in their definitions and practices. DevOps provides “Better Value, Sooner, Safer, and Happier”[1](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/observability-engineering/9781492076438/ch04.html#ch01fn4) through culture and collaboration between development and operations groups. SRE joins together systems engineering and software skill sets to solve complex operational problems through developing software systems rather than manual toil. As we’ll explore in this chapter, the combination of cloud native technology, DevOps and SRE methodologies, and observability are stronger together than each of their individual parts.

# Observability: Debugging Then Versus Now

The goal of observability is to provide a level of introspection that helps people reason about the internal state of their systems and applications. That state can be achieved in various ways. For example, you could employ a combination of logs, metrics, and traces as debugging signals. But the goal of observability itself is agnostic in terms of how it’s accomplished.

In monolithic systems, you could anticipate the potential areas of failure and therefore could debug your systems by yourself and achieve appropriate observability by using verbose application logging, or coarse system-level metrics such as CPU/disk utilization combined with flashes of insight. However, these legacy tools and instinctual techniques no longer work for the new set of management challenges created by the opportunities of cloud native systems.

Among the example technologies that the cloud native definition mentions are containers, service meshes, microservices, and immutable infrastructure. Compared to legacy technologies like virtual machines and monolithic architectures, containerized microservices inherently introduce new problems such as cognitive complexity from interdependencies between components, transient state discarded after container restart, and incompatible versioning between separately released components. Immutable infrastructure means that it’s no longer feasible to `ssh` into a host for debugging, as it may perturb the state on that host. Service meshes add an additional routing layer that provides a powerful way to collect information about how service calls are happening, but that data is of limited use unless you can analyze it later.

Debugging anomalous issues requires a new set of capabilities to help engineers detect and understand problems from *within* their systems. Tools such as distributed tracing can help capture the state of system internals when specific events occurred. By adding context in the form of many key-value pairs to each event, you will create a wide, rich view of what is happening in all the parts of your system that are typically hidden and impossible to reason about.

For example, in a distributed, cloud native system, you may find it difficult to debug an issue occurring across multiple hosts by using logs or other noncorrelated signals. But by utilizing a combination of signals, you could systematically drill down into anomalous behavior starting from the high level of your service metrics, iterating until you discover which hosts are most relevant. Sharding logs by host means you no longer need centralized retention and indexing of all logs as you would for a monolith. To understand the relationships among subcomponents and services in a monolith or distributed system, you previously may have needed to keep the relationships of all system components in your head.

Instead, if you can use distributed tracing to break down and visualize each individual step, you need to understand the complexity of your dependencies only as they impact execution of a specific request. Understanding which calling and receiving code paths are associated with which versions of each service allows you to find reverse compatibility problems and any changes that broke compatibility.

Observability provides a shared context that enables teams to debug problems in a cohesive and rational way, regardless of a system’s complexity, rather than requiring one person’s mind to retain the entire state of the system.

# Observability Empowers DevOps and SRE Practices

It’s the job of DevOps and SRE teams to understand production systems and tame complexity. So it’s natural for them to care about the observability of the systems they build and run. SRE focuses on managing services according to service level objectives (SLOs) and error budgets (see Chapters [12](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/observability-engineering/9781492076438/ch12.html#using_service_level_objectives_for_reli) and [13](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/observability-engineering/9781492076438/ch13.html#acting_on_and_debugging_slo_based_alert)). DevOps focuses on managing services through cross-functional practices, with developers maintaining responsibility for their code in production. Rather than starting with a plethora of alerts that enumerate potential causes of outages, mature DevOps and SRE teams both measure any visible symptoms of user pain and then drill down into understanding the outage by using observability tooling.

The shift away from cause-based monitoring and toward symptom-based monitoring means that you need the ability to explain the failures you see in practice, instead of the traditional approach of enumerating a growing list of known failure modes. Rather than burning a majority of their time responding to a slew of false alarms that have no bearing on the end-user visible performance, teams can focus on systematically winnowing hypotheses and devising mitigations for actual system failures. We cover this in greater detail in [Chapter 12](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/observability-engineering/9781492076438/ch12.html#using_service_level_objectives_for_reli).

Beyond the adoption of observability for break/fix use cases, forward-thinking DevOps and SRE teams use engineering techniques such as feature flagging, continuous verification, and incident analysis. Observability supercharges these use cases by providing the data required to effectively practice them. Let’s explore how observability empowers each:

Chaos engineering and continuous verificationThese require you to have observability to “detect when the system is normal and how it deviates from that steady-state as the experiment’s method is executed.”2You cannot meaningfully perform chaos experiments without the ability to understand the system’s baseline state, to predict expected behavior under test, and to explain deviations from expected behavior. “There is no point in doing chaos engineering when you actually don’t know how your system is behaving at your current state before you inject chaos.”3Feature flaggingThis introduces novel combinations of flag states in production that you cannot test exhaustively in preproduction environments. Therefore, you need observability to understand the individual and collective impact of each feature flag, user by user. The notion of monitoring behavior component by component no longer holds when an endpoint can execute in multiple ways depending on which user is calling it and which feature flags are enabled.Progressive release patternsThese patterns, such as canarying and blue/green deployment, require observability to effectively know when to stop the release and to analyze whether the system’s deviations from the expected are a result of the release.Incident analysis and blameless postmortemThese require you to construct clear models about your sociotechnical systems—not just what was happening inside the technical system at fault, but also what the human operatorsbelievedwas happening during the incident. Thus, robust observability tooling facilitates performing excellent retrospectives by providing an ex post facto paper trail anddetails to cue retrospective writers.# Conclusion

As the practices of DevOps and SRE continue to evolve, and as platform engineering grows as an umbrella discipline, more innovative engineering practices will inevitably emerge in your toolchains. But all of those innovations will depend upon having observability as a core sense to understand your modern complex systems. The shift toward DevOps, SRE, and cloud native practices have created a need for a solution like observability. In turn, observability has also supercharged the capabilities of teams that have adopted its practice.

[1](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/observability-engineering/9781492076438/ch04.html#ch01fn4-marker) Jonathan Smart, [“Want to Do an Agile Transformation? Don’t. Focus on Flow, Quality, Happiness, Safety, and Value”](https://oreil.ly/KQEy9), July 21, 2018.

[2](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/observability-engineering/9781492076438/ch04.html#ch01fn5-marker) Russ Miles, [Chaos Engineering Observability](https://oreil.ly/4uYoR) (Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly, 2019).

[3](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/observability-engineering/9781492076438/ch04.html#ch01fn6-marker) Ana Medina, [“Chaos Engineering with Ana Medina of Gremlin”](https://oreil.ly/KdUW9), *o11ycast* podcast, August 15, 2019.
